# Engineering-AIAI
Preprint Article for EAIAI


Hot or warm water based bitumen production process from mineable oil sands is extremely complex in nature and highly sensitive to variability of oil sands ores and process conditions. Understanding ore processability and developing sensible markers for ore processability are considered to be a challenging task. In addition to processing variables such as temperature, hydrodynamics, process water chemistry and chemical additives, ore characteristics, such as bitumen content, connate water content and chemistry, fines content and more importantly types of fines play a decisive role in determining the processability of oil sands ores. It is therefore valuable to analyze the processability of oil sands ore using statistical modelling approaches. In this paper, a symbolic regression method based on genetic programming is applied to understanding oil sands ore processability, such as identifying sensible markers of ore processability. The analysis is conducted using variety input variables representing ore characteristics and operating conditions. The model is expressed analytically by a combination of these input variables and a given set of math operators and constants. This model provides a reliable prediction for the response variables, e.g, bitumen recovery. The results show an agreement between simulation and experiment data, highlighting the applicability of the Symbolic Regression (SR) method in identifying a mathematical model to describe the mechanisms involved in oil sands processing. 
